---
title: "Historical Compilation -- A Computational Framing for Parsing Historical Perspectives"
date: 2024-05-23T19:29:04-07:00
draft: false
---

I've been intrigued for some time now about how human brains have been relatively similar to their current physiology for the last 200,000 to 300,000 years. Some very smart people lately have rapidly accelerated the technological prowess of humanity. The fact that Newtons, Einsteins, and Teslas have been able to make immense technological innovations so recently, as opposed to 200,000 years ago, seems to be due to the fact that there is significant available infrastructural opportunity to enable technologies, such as electronics, to exist within the *adjacent possible*. 

It is a strange reflection just how much technological infrastructure aids our thinking in light of the above reflection. If our problem solving abilities have been relatively similar these past few hundred thousand years, what is it we have been doing? The immediate answer is that we have been building up that aforementioned foundation of infrastructure. This is true. If Einstein had been born 15,000 years ago, he would have invented the canoe. Transforming the available resources (rocks, dirt, water) into microcontrollers is going to take a long, long time. We had to collect iron before we could create steel. That is all well and good as an explanation. But what I am more interested in a different question: 'What was it that we were *thinking* for all of that time?'

I should mention now that the inspiration for this article is a sort of rebuttal against the notion that people of the ancient past were somehow less intelligent than those alive today. Or, more precisely, that they did not think as hard. That they did not produce useful, truthful ideas. That ancient beliefs are commonly considered 'primitive'. The dismissal of ancient thought as nonsense, superseded by today's superior modern thought, is an almost ubiquitous notion. Though, I don't think this is the right framing. Instead of considering the intellectual zeitgeist as an iterative implementation, replaced at each sequential generation with an improved model, I think it is better to think of it in the same way we understand layers of abstraction in our understanding of computation. 

At the hardware level, the computer is a physical device. A circuit that adds, multiplies, moves, etc. At the highest levels of abstraction we have today, a computer is artificial intelligence, blockchains, gigantic repositories of culture alive within social media. Language models are not any less composed of adds and multiplies now that they can hold a conversation. By layers and layers of compilation on compilation, simple components, ones and zeros become radically complex.

I think the right framing for the evolution of ideas is *compilation*, not an iterative replacement. The way we think today is a high level abstraction built upon simple truths that have been developed over hundreds of thousands of years. Simple ideas of truth, hidden in lower level historical abstractions are relied on, but misunderstood. It is common today to say that the beliefs of the past are nonsense because they don't fit into today's layer of abstraction. Today we think in python, but ancient wisdom is written in assembly. Historical perspectives contain much truth, but they require careful translation such that they can be understood in the same way as was understood in the past.

